
<!-- Originally located at bottom of page 100, vol. II. Integrated into main text -->
<div2>
<head>Addendum to Fasciculus VII.</head>


<p>Add to note on p. 87&mdash;

<p>A similar idea is found in the Hermotimus of Lucian, chapters 80 and 81. A philosopher is indignant with his pupil on account of his fees being eleven days in arrear. The uncle of the young man, who is standing by, being a rude and uncultured person, says to the philosopher&mdash;&ldquo;My good man, pray let us hear no more complaints about the great injustice with which you conceive yourself to have been treated, for all it amounts to is, that we have bought words from you, and have up to the present time paid you in the same coin.&rdquo;


<div1 type=Errata id=corrigenda>
<head>Further Corrigenda and Addenda</head>

<head type=sub>To Vol. I.</head>

<!-- The following notes are integrated into the main text of the work -->

<p>Page 7, line 29. &ldquo;This boy will repeat by heart everything that he has heard once.&rdquo;

<p>It appears from an article in Mélusine by A Bart, entitled An Ancient Manual of Sorcery, and consisting mainly of passages translated from Burnell&apos;s Sámavidhána Bráhma&ndotb;a, that this power can be acquired in the following way, &ldquo;After a fast of three nights, take a plant of <hi>soma</hi> (<hi>Asclepias acida</hi>;) recite a certain formula and eat of the plant a thousand times, you will be able to repeat anything after hearing it once. Or bruise the flowers in water, and drink the mixture for a year. Or drink <hi>soma</hi>, that is to say the fermented juice of the plant for a month. Or do it always.&rdquo; (Mélusine, 1878, p. 107; II, 7, 4&ndash;7.)

<p>In the Milinda Pañho, (Pali Miscellany by V. Trenckner, Part. I, p. 14,) the child Nágasena learns the whole of the three Vedas by hearing them repeated once.

<p>Page 12, line 16. &ldquo;Every day when he awakes from sleep, a hundred gold pieces shall be found under his pillow.&rdquo; In one of Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen, Vogelkopf und Vogelherz</foreign> (p. 90) a boy named Fortunat eats the heart of the Glücksvogel and under his pillow every day are found three ducats. See also Der Vogel Goldschweif, in Gaal&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 195.

<p>Page 12, line 26. &ldquo;Story of Brahmadatta.&rdquo; This story is, according to Dr. Rajendra Lál Mitra, found in a MS. called the Bodhisattva Avadána. (Account of the Buddhist Literature of Nepal, p. 53).

<p>Page 14. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> We find a magic ring, brooch and cloth in No. XLIV of the English Gesta. See also <foreign lang=de>Syrische Sagen und Märchen, von Eugen Prym und Albert Socin</foreign>, p. 79, where there is a flying carpet. There is a magic table-cloth in the Bohemian Story of Büsmanda, (Waldau, p. 44) and a magic pot on p. 436 of the same collection; and a food-providing <hi>mesa</hi> in the Portuguese story of A Cacheirinha (Coelho, <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 58). In the Pentamerone No. 42 there is a magic chest. Kuhn has some remarks on the &ldquo;<foreign lang=de>Tischchen deck dich</foreign>&rdquo; of German tales in his <foreign lang=de>Westfälische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 369.

<p>For a similar artifice to Putraka&apos;s, see the story entitled <foreign lang=de>Fischer-Märchen</foreign> in Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 168, Waldau, <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, pp. 260 and 564, and Dasent&apos;s Norse Tales, pp. 213 and 214.

<p>Page 20. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;Cp. the 67th Story in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, and the 29th in the Pentamerone of Basile. There is a somewhat similar story in the English Gesta (Herrtage, No. XXV) in which three knights are killed<corr>.</corr>

<p>A very similar story is quoted in <corr sic=Melusine>Mélusine</corr>, p. 178, from Thorburn&apos;s Bannu or our Afghan Frontier.

<p>Page 22. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;There is a slight resemblance to this story in Sagas from the Far East, p. 222. By this it may be connected with a cycle of European <pb id=pb628 n=628>tales about princes with ferine skin &amp;c. Apparently a treatise has been written on this story by Herr Varnhagen. It is mentioned in the <hi>Saturday Review</hi> of 22nd July, 1882 as, &ldquo;<foreign lang=de>Ein Indisches Märchen auf seiner Wanderung durch die Asiatischen und Europäischen Litteraturen.</foreign>&rdquo;

<p>Page 25. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> So Sigfrid hears two birds talking above his head in Hagen&apos;s Helden-Sagen, Vol. I, p. 345. In the story of Lalitánga extracted by Professor Nilmani Mukerjea from a collection of Jaina tales called the Kathá Kosha, and printed in his Sáhitya Parichaya, Part II, we have a similar incident.

<p>Page 36. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> For a similar <foreign lang=de>Zaubergarten</foreign> see Liebrecht&apos;s translation of Dunlop&apos;s History of Fiction, p. 251, and note 325; and Gonzenbach&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sicilianische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 224. To this latter story there is a very close parallel in Játaka No. 220, (Fausböll, Vol. II, p. 188) where Sakko makes a garden for the Bodhisattva, who is threatened with death by the king, if it is not done.

<p>Page 38. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> The incident is related in Táránátha&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, uebersetzt von Schiefner</foreign>, p. 74.

<p>Page 47. <hi>Add to note on Chapter VII.</hi> See also Grössler&apos;s Sagen der Grafschaft Mansfeld, pp. 58 and 59; the Pentamerone of Basile, translated by Liebrecht, Vol. I, p. 251; Dasent&apos;s Norse Tales, p. 347, &ldquo;The Troll turned round, and, of course, as soon as he saw the sun, he burst;&rdquo; Grimm&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Irische Märchen</foreign>, p. x; Kuhn&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Westfälische Märchen</foreign>, p. 63; Schöppner&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagenbuch der Bayerischen Lande</foreign>, Vol. I, pp. 123, and 228; and Bernhard Schmidt&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Griechische Märchen</foreign>, p. 138. He quotes the following interesting passage from the Philopseudes of Lucian, <!-- http://www.poesialatina.it/Greek/testi/Lucianus/Philopseudes_sive_incredulus.html --><GR>Sun=hn >'aqri d`h >alektru'onwn >hko'usamen a|d'ontwn t'ote d`h <'h te Sel'hnh >an'eptato e>ic t`on o>uran`on ka`i <h <Ek'ath >'edu kat`a t=hc g=hc, ka`i t`a >'alla f'asmata >hfan'isjh</GR>, &amp;c.

<p>Page 53, last line of page. In addition to the passages quoted in the note at the end of Vol. I, cp. the story of Amys and Amylion, Ellis&apos;s Early English Romances, pp. 597 and 598, the Pentamerone of Basile, Vol. I, p. 367; Prym and Socin&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 73; Grohmann&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 268; Gonzenbach&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sicilianische Märchen</foreign>, p. 354, with Dr. Köhler&apos;s notes.

<p>Page 67. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;Cp. the perturbation of King Samson in Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 26, and Spence Hardy&apos;s Manual of Buddhism (1860) pp. 129 and 130.

<p>Page 69, line 21. &ldquo;I have not a sword worthy of me&rdquo; &amp;c. Cp. the way in which Kandar goes in search of a sword in Prym and Socin&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 205.

<p>Page 70. <hi>Add to the note at the end of the Volume.</hi> See also Schöppner&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Geschichte der Bayerischen Lande</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 258.

<p>Page 80. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;Cp. Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, No. LXXI, p. 155.

<p>Page 82, last two lines. Cp. the way in which Rüdiger carries off the daughter of king Osantrix, Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 227.

<p>Page 91. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> The story of &Sacute;aktimatí is the 19th in the &Sacute;uka Saptati. I have been presented by Professor Nílmani Mukhopádhyáya with a copy of a MS. of this work made by Babu Ume&sacute;a Chandra Gupta.

<p>Page 93. <hi>Add to note on Chapter XIII.</hi> In Gonzenbach&apos;a <foreign lang=de>Sicilianische Märchen</foreign>, No. 55, Vol. I, p. 359, Epomata plays some young men much the same trick as Devasmitá, and they try in much the same way to conceal their disgrace. The story is the second in my copy of the &Sacute;uka Saptati.

<p>Page 97, line 1. Cp. the distribution of presents on the occasion of King Etzel&apos;s marriage in the <foreign lang=de>Nibelungen Lied</foreign>.

<pb id=pb629 n=629><p>Page 99. <hi>Add to note on Chapter XIV.</hi> See also the extract from Sinclair&apos;s Statistical Account of Scotland in Brand&apos;s Popular Antiquities, Vol. 1, p. 225; &ldquo;When a Highlander goes to bathe or to drink water out of a consecrated fountain, he must always approach by going round the place from East to West on the South side, in imitation of the apparent diurnal motion of the sun. This is called in Gaelic going round the right, or the lucky way. The opposite course is the wrong, or the unlucky way. And if a person&apos;s meat or drink were to affect the wind-pipe, or come against his breath, they would instantly cry out, &ldquo;Desheal,&rdquo; which is an ejaculation praying it may go by the right way.<corr>&rdquo;</corr> Cp. the note in Munro&apos;s Lucretius on V, 1199, and Burton&apos;s Narratives from Criminal Trials in Scotland, Vol. I, p. 278.

<p>Page 102. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> Webster, Duchess of Malfi, Act IV, Sc. 2, tells a similar story,

<lg>
    <l>&ldquo;A great physician, when the Pope was sick
    <l>Of a deep melancholy, presented him
    <l>With several sorts of madmen, which wild object,
    <l>Being full of change and sport, freed him to laugh,
    <l>And so the imposthume broke.&rdquo;
</lg>

<p>Page 103. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> In the Pentamerone of Basile, Tale 22, a princess is set afloat in a box, and found by a king, whose wife she eventually becomes. There is a similar incident in Kaden&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Unter den Olivenbäumen</foreign>, p. 220.

<p>Page 108, line 12. There is a certain resemblance in the story of Sunda and Upasunda to that of Otus and Ephialtes; see Preller&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol. I p. 81. Cp. also Grohmann&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 35.

<p>Page 119. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;See Baring Gould&apos;s Curious Myths of the Middle Ages (New Edition, 1869) p. 170. In a startling announcement of the birth of Antichrist which appeared in 1623, purporting to come from the brothers of the Order of St. John, the following passage occurs,&mdash;&ldquo;The child is dusky, has pleasant mouth and eyes, teeth pointed like those of a cat, ears large, stature by no means exceeding that of other children; <hi>the said child, incontinent on his birth, walked and talked perfectly well</hi>.&rdquo;

<p>Page 121, line 6. <hi>Add to the note at the end of Volume I.</hi> See also Grohmann&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 41.

<p>Page 126. <hi>Add to note &dagger;.</hi> The same idea is found in the 39th Játaka, p. 322 of Rhys Davids&apos; translation, and in the 257th Játaka, Vol. II, p. 297 of Fausböll&apos;s edition.

<p>Page 130, line 6. <hi>Add to the note at the end of Volume I.</hi> See the remarks in Bernhard Schmidt&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Griechische Märchen</foreign>, p. 237.

<p>Page 137, line 5 from the bottom of the page. There is a curious parallel to this story in Táránátha&apos;s History of Buddhism, translated into German by Schiefner, p. 203. Here a Rákshasí assumes the form of a former king&apos;s wife, and kills all the subjects, one after another, as fast as they are elected to the royal dignity.

<p>Page 139, line 34. Cp. the freeing of Argo by Hercules cutting off Pallair&apos;s arm in the Togail Troi, ed. Stokes, p. 67.

<p>Page 142. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> Cp. also Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, pp. 365 and 432, Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 76; and Prym und Socin&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 72. See also Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales, Introduction pp. xlix<corr sic="."></corr> and 1.

<p>Page 154. <hi>Add to note §</hi>&mdash;Cp. also Grössler&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus der Grafschaft Mansfeld</foreign>, <pb id=pb630 n=630>p. 217, Brand&apos;s Popular Antiquities, Vol. III, p. 56; Grohmann&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 226.

<p>Page 157. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> The same idea is found in Bohemia, see Grohmann&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 210. Cp. Grimm&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Irische Märchen</foreign>, p. cviii.<corr sic="&rdquo;"></corr>

<p>Page 162. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;There is a certain resemblance in this story to that of Equitan in Murie&apos;s lays. See Ellis&apos;s Early English Metrical Romances, pp. 46 and 47. It also resembles the story of Lalitánga extracted from the Kathá Kosha by Professor Nilmani Mukerjea in his Sáhitya Parichaya, Part II, and the conclusion of the story of Damannaka from the same source found in his Part I. The story of Fridolin is also found in Schöppner&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagenbuch der Bayerischen Lande</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 204.

<p>Page 172, line 13. &ldquo;Observe<corr>,</corr> my friend, this woman has five sons and I have only one.&rdquo; Cp. Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 364; Gonzenbach&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sicilianische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. I, pp. 285 and 294.

<p>Page 185. In the 33rd of the Syrian stories collected by Prym and Socin we have a king of snakes and water of life.

<p>Page 203. A report similar to that spread against Harasvámin was in circulation during the French Revolution. Taine in his history of the Revolution, Vol. I, p. 418 tells the following anecdote: &ldquo;M. de Montlosier found himself the object of many unpleasant attentions when he went to the National Assembly. In particular a woman of about thirty used to sharpen a large knife when he passed and look at him in a threatening manner. On enquiry he discovered the cause&mdash;<hi lang=fr>Deux enfants du quartier ont disparu enlevés par de bohémiens, et c&apos;est maintenant un bruit répandu que M. de Montlosier, le marquis de Mirabeau, et d&apos;autres députés du côté droit se rassemblent pour faire des orgies dans lesquelles ils mangent de petits enfants.</hi>&rdquo;

<p>Page 206. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;We have a similar incident in Melusine, p. 447, The story is entitled La Montagne Noire on Les Filles du Diable. See also the Pentamerone of Basile, Tale 49, Ralston&apos;s Russian Folk-Tales, p. 76; Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, pp. 37 and 255 and ff; and Dasent&apos;s Norse Tales, pp. 31&ndash;32, 212&ndash;213, and 330&ndash;331.

<p>Page 215, line 24. Cp. the golden rose in Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 44.

<p>Page 221. <hi>Add to note §</hi>&mdash;Cp. the Glücksvogel in Prym and Socin, <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 269, and the eagle which carries Chaucer in the House of Fame. In the story of Lalitánga, extracted by Professor Nilmani Mukerjea from the Kathá Kosha, a collection of Jaina stories, a Bháru&ndotb;&ddotb;a carries the hero to the city of Champá. There he cures the princess by a remedy, the knowledge of which he had acquired by overhearing a conversation among the birds.

<p>Page 237. <hi>Add to note &Dagger;</hi>&mdash;This idea is found in the Telapattajátaka, Fausböll, Vol. I, p. 393.

<p>Page 248. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;Mr. Whitley Stokes has sent me the following quotation in the <foreign lang=fr>Revue Celtique V</foreign>, 130 from P. Cahier, <foreign lang=fr>Caracteristiques des Saints I</foreign>, 105;

<p>&ldquo;A certain virgin Lucia (doubtful whether of Bologna or of Alexandria) <hi lang=fr>se voyant fréquemment suivie par un jeune homme qui affectait de l&apos;accompagner partout dès q&apos;elle quittait sa maison, lui demanda enfin ce qui l&apos;attachait si fort à ses pas. Celui-ci ayant répondu que c&apos; etait la beauté de ses yeux, la jeune fille se servit de son fuseau pour faire sortir ses yeux de leur orbite, et dit à son poursuivant qu&apos;il pouvait les prendre et la laisser dèsormais en repos. On ajoute que cette generosité effrayante changea si fort le c&oelig;ur du jeune homme qu&apos;il embrassa la profession religieuse.</hi> The story of the ascetic who conquered anger, resembles closely the Khantivádijátaka No. 313 in Fausböll&apos;s edition, Vol. III, <pb id=pb631 n=631>p. 39. It is also found in the Bodhisattva Avadána, under the title Kshánti Játaka, and in the Mahávastu Avadána in a form closely resembling that of the Páli Játaka book. See Dr. Rajendra Lál Mitra&apos;s Nepalese Buddhist Literature, pp. 55, 159, and 160.

<p>Page 253. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;Cp. also Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>, No. 51, Pedro e Pedrito, p. 118, and Grimm&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Irische Märchen</foreign>, pp. 106, 107. In the Gagga Játaka, No. 135, Fausböll, Vol. II, p. 15, the Buddha tells how the custom of saying &ldquo;Jíva&rdquo; or &ldquo;God bless you&rdquo; originated. A Yakka was allowed to eat all who did not say &ldquo;Jíva&rdquo; and &ldquo;Pa&tdotb;ijíva.&rdquo; Zimmer in his <foreign lang=de>Alt-Indisches Leben</foreign>, p. 60, quotes from the Atharva Veda, &ldquo;<foreign lang=de>vor Unglück-bedeutendem Niesen</foreign>.&rdquo;

<p>Page 263. <hi>Add to note.</hi> A striking parallel will be found in Basile&apos;s Pentamerone, Vol. I, p. 166. See also Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 272; Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Die Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 178; Coelho, <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 47. In Waldau&apos;s Story there is a strange similarity in the behaviour of the king, on first seeing the young physician, to that of Vasudatta. See also the Sixth Tale in Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales and the remarks in the Introduction, p. li.

<p>Page 289, near the bottom of the page. Cp. for the artifice used to ruin Kadalígarbhá, Dusent&apos;s Norse Tales, pp. 65 and 66.

<p>Page 290. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;See also Perrault&apos;s <foreign lang=fr>Le petit Poucet</foreign>; Basile&apos;s Pentamerone, No. 48.

<p>Page 304, line 20. Cp. the conduct of the Meerweib in Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 55.

<p>Page 305. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;Cp. also the following passage from Brand&apos;s Popular Antiquities, Vol. II, p. 78. &ldquo;Borlase quotes from Martin&apos;s Western Islands. &lsquo;The same lustration by carrying of fire is performed round about women after child-bearing, and round about children before they are christened, as an effectual means to preserve both the mother and the infant from the power of evil spirits.<corr>&rsquo;</corr>&rdquo; Brand compares the Amphidromia at Athens. See Kuhn&apos;s <corr sic="&ldquo;"></corr><foreign lang=de>Westfälische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. I, pp. 125, and 289: Vol. II, pp. 17 and 33&ndash;34.

<p>Page 306. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;Preller, in his Römische Mythologie, p. 488, has a note on <hi>incubones</hi> or treasure-guarding spirits. Treasures can often be acquired by stealing the caps worn by these <hi>incubones</hi> as a symbol of their secret and mysterious character. See also the Pentamerone of Basile, p. 96; Grohmann, <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 29 and ff; Bernhard Schmidt&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Griechische Märchen</foreign>, p. 28. The bug-bears were no doubt much of the kind found in <corr sic="Schöppner&rdquo;s">Schöppner&apos;s</corr> <foreign lang=de>Sagenbuch der Bayerischen Lande</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 87. For the &ldquo;hand of glory&rdquo; see Baring Gould&apos;s Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, pp. 405&ndash;409. Brand in his Popular Antiquities Vol. I, p. 312, quotes from Bergerac&apos;s Satirical Characters and Handsome descriptions in his Letters translated out of the French by a Person of Honour, 1658, p. 45, &ldquo;I cause the thieves to burn candles of dead men&apos;s grease to lay the hosts asleep while they rob their houses.&rdquo; A light has this property in Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 360; and in Kuhn&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Westfälische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 146.

<p>Page 327. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;See Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 155; Ariosto, Orlando Furioso, III, 14.

<p>Page 336. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;Cp. Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. III, pp. 165 and 166.

<p>Page 338. Kuhn, in his <foreign lang=de>Westfälische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 183, mentions a belief that horns grew on the head of one who looked at the Wild Huntsman. It is just possible that this notion may be derived from the story of Actæon. A statue found in the ruins of the villa of Antoninus Pius near Lavinium represents him with his human form and with the horns just sprouting. (Engravings from Ancient Marbles in the <pb id=pb632 n=632>British Museum, Plate XLV.) Cp. also the story of Cipus in Ovid&apos;s Metamorphoses XV, 552&ndash;621. For the magic pipe see Grimm&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Irische Märchen, Einleitung</foreign>, p. lxxxiii; Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, p. 264. Remarks on the pipe and horns will be found in Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales, Introduction pp. liv&ndash;lvi.

<p>Page 340. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> Cp. with the string the gold rings in the Volsunga Saga, Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. III, p. 30. In Ovid&apos;s Metamorphoses VIII, 850, and ff. there is an account of Mestra&apos;s transformations. Neptune gave her the power of transforming herself whenever she was sold by her father. See also the story of Achelous and Hercules in book IX of the Metamorphoses; Prym and Socin&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 229, where we have the incident of the selling; Waldau, <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 125; Coelho <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 32.

<p>Page 343, line 11. &ldquo;The congregation of witches.&rdquo; The word <hi lang=sa-Latn>samvara</hi>, which I have translated &ldquo;congregation,&rdquo; probably means &ldquo;sorcery;&rdquo; see Böhtlingk and Roth <hi>s. v.</hi>

<p>Page 355. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> <corr sic="&ldquo;"></corr>See Volsunga Saga in Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. III, pp. 8 and 9.

<p>Page 360. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;In a Welsh story (Professor Rhys, Welsh Tales, p<corr>.</corr> 8) a young man discovers his lady-love by the way in which her sandals are tied. There are only two to choose from, and he seems to have depended solely upon his own observation.

<p>Page 364, line 5. In Ovid&apos;s Metamorphoses VIII, 855, the <hi>dominus</hi> asks Mestra, who has been transformed into a fisherman, if she has seen herself pass that way.

<p>Page 364. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> In Prym and Socin&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, No. LXII, page 250, the flea believes himself to be dead, and tells every one so.

<p>Page 365, line 28. Cp. Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. II, p. 167, where Ake makes his wife Wolfriana intoxicated with the object of discovering her secret.

<p>Page 369. <hi>Add to note on Chapter XXXIX.</hi> The pursuit and the tasks are found in the tale called La Montagne Noire, on p. 448 of Melusine, a periodical which appeared in the year 1878, and in Branca-flor, No. XIV in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, and in Gaal&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 60. The tasks are found in the Pentamerone of Basile, Vol. I, p. 226, and in Vol. II, p. 186; in Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 182, (the title of the tale is <foreign lang=de>Die dankbaren Thiere</foreign>; some grateful ants are found at page 339;) in Grössler&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus der Grafschaft Mansfeld</foreign>, pp. 60 and 61; in Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, pp. 18, 142, 262; in Kuhn&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Westfälische Märchen</foreign>, Vol. II. p. 249, frogs, ants, and wasps help the hero. Cp. for the pursuit Liebrecht&apos;s translation of the Pentamerone of Basile, Vol. I, pp. 74&ndash;76 and 160.

<p>Page 370, line 27. This incident is found in the story of Yavakríta in the 135th chapter of the Mahábhárata.

<p>Page 372, line 17. In the Mahávastu Avadána (in Dr. R. L. Mitra&apos;s Sanskrit Buddhist Literature of Nepal, p. 123) a girl named Amitá is cured of leprosy by being shut up in an underground chamber.

<p>Page 385. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> In Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 44, Hilda reunites, as fast as she is cut in two, but at last Dietrich, by the advice of Hildebrand, steps between the two pieces, and interferes with the <hi lang=la>vis medicatrix</hi>. Baring Gould seems to identify this story of Indívarasena with that of St. George. In his essay on that hero-saint, (p. 305, New Edition,) he observes, &ldquo;In the Kathá Sarit Ságara a hero fights a demon monster, and releases a beautiful woman from his thraldom. The story, as told by Soma Deva, has already progressed, and assumed a form similar to that of Perseus and Andromeda.

<pb id=pb633 n=633><p>Page 387. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;The story of Amys and Amylion, in Ellis&apos;s Metrical Romances, resembles closely the tale, as given by Grimm and Gonzenbach. So too do the 7th and 9th stories of the 1st day in the Pentamerone of Basile, and the 52nd in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 120. Perhaps the oldest mythological pair of brothers are the A&sacute;vins, who have their counterpart in the Dioscuri and in Heracles and Iphiclus.

<p>Page 393. <hi>Add to footnote *</hi>&mdash;See Liebrecht&apos;s translation of the Pentamerone of Basile, Vol. I, p. 55.

<p>Page 397. <hi>Add to footnote &dagger;</hi>&mdash;<corr sic="&ldquo;"></corr>See also the Pentamerone of Basile, Vol. II, p. 131, and the Ucchanga Játaka, No. 67 in Dr. Fausböll&apos;s edition.

<p>Page 418. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;Cp. Livy I, 39; and <foreign lang=fr>Le Lotus de la Bonne Loi</foreign> (Burnouf) p. 4.

<p>Page 445. <hi>Add to footnote</hi> which commences on this page. Cp. the institution of the <GR>farmako`i</GR> connected with the worship of Apollo! Preller, <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol. I, p. 202; see also pp. 240 and 257 and Vol. II, pp. 310 and 466; Herodotus VII, 197; Plato, Min. p. 315, C; Preller, <foreign lang=de>Römische Mythologie</foreign>, p. 104.

<p>Page 464. <hi>Add to note &Dagger;</hi>&mdash;<corr sic="&ldquo;"></corr>Cp. also Grössler, <foreign lang=de>Sagen der Grafschaft Mansfeld</foreign>, p. 192. See the remarkable statement in Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, p. 31, quoted from Pausanias I, 22, 1, to the effect that the story of Phædra was known to &ldquo;Barbarians.&rdquo;

<p>Page 469. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;See Brand&apos;s Popular Antiquities, Vol. III, pp. 252&ndash;255.

<p>Page 487. In line 1 of the footnote, for &ldquo;Genovesa&rdquo; <hi>read</hi> &ldquo;Genovefa.&rdquo; <hi>Add to the note.</hi> For parallels to the story of Genoveva or Genovefa see Prym und Socin, <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, LII, and the Introduction, p. xxii.

<p>Page 488. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;Cp. Thalaba the Destroyer, Book I, 30. The passage in the Pseudo-Callisthenes will be found in III, 28, Karl Mueller&apos;s Edition.

<p>Page 490. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> See Prym und Socin, <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 3; Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, p. 49; Coelho, <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 109.

<p>Page 525. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> See Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, p. 239.

<p>Page 535. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;See the quotations in Brand&apos;s Popular Antiquities (Bohn&apos;s Edition, Vol. I, pp. 365 and 366) from Moresini Papatus and Melton&apos;s Astrologaster. Brand remarks, &ldquo;The Romanists, in imitation of the heathens, have assigned tutelary gods to each member of the body.&rdquo;

<p>Page 544. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;Cp. Prym und Socin, <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 116, and Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, pp. 101 and 102.

<p>Page 554. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;It is also found in the Avadána &Sacute;ataka: see Dr. R. L. Mitra&apos;s Buddhist Literature of Nepal, p<corr>.</corr> 28, where the above MS. is described. See also Dr. R. Morris&apos;s remarks in the Academy of the 27th of August, 1881.

<p>Page 555. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;See Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 537, and the remarks of Preller in his <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol. II, p. 345.

<p>Page 564, last 3 lines of the page. Preller in his <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol. II, p. 475, refers to a Servian story, in which a shepherd saves the life of a snake in a forest fire. In return for this service, the snake&apos;s father gives him endless treasures, and teaches him the language of birds.

<p>Page 564. <hi>Add to note &Dagger;</hi>&mdash;Snakes&apos; crowns are mentioned in Grössler, <foreign lang=de>Sagen der Grafschaft Mansfeld</foreign>, p. 178, in <corr sic="Weckenstedt&apos;s">Veckenstedt&apos;s</corr> <foreign lang=de>Wendische Märchen</foreign>, pp. 403&ndash;405, and in Grohmann, <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, pp. 219 and 223.

<p>Page 565, line 15. In Prester John&apos;s letter quoted by Baring Gould, Curious Myths <pb id=pb634 n=634>of the Middle Ages, New Edition, p. 43, we find, &ldquo;In one of our lands, hight Zone, are worms called in our tongue Salamanders. These worms can only live in fire, and they build cocoons like silkworms, which are unwound by the ladies of our palace, and spun into cloth and dresses, which are worn by our Exaltedness. <hi>These dresses, in order to be cleansed and washed, are cast into flames.</hi>&rdquo;

<p>Page 567. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> Bhíma disguises himself as a cook in the Viráta parvan of the Mahábhárata. Pausanias tells us, Book I, ch. 16, <GR>Sele'ukw| g`ar, <'oc <wrm=ato >ek Makedon'iac s`un >Alex'andrw|, J'uonti >en P'ellh| t=w| Di`i, t`a x'ula >ep`i to=u bwmo=u ke'imena pro'ubh te a>ut'omata pr`oc t`o >'agalma, ka`i >'aneu pur`oc <'hfjh.</GR>





<pb id=pb635 n=635>
<div1 id=Corrigenda2>
<head>Corrigenda and Addenda</head>

<head type=sub>To Vol. II.</head>

<!-- The following notes are integrated into the main text of the work -->

<p>Page <corr sic="3">2</corr>. <hi>Add to the footnote</hi> which begins on this page. Cp. Prym und Socin <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 343; Grimm, <foreign lang=de>Irische Märchen</foreign>, No. 9, &ldquo;<foreign lang=de>Die Flasche</foreign>,&rdquo; p. 42. In the Bhadragha&tdotb;ajátaka, No. 291 Sakko gives a pitcher, which is lost in the same way. Grimm in his <foreign lang=de>Irische Elfenmärchen</foreign>, Introduction, p. xxxvii, remarks that &ldquo;if a man discloses any supernatural power which he possesses, it is at once lost.&rdquo;

<p>Page <corr sic="33">32</corr>. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;This is the 30th story in my copy of the &Sacute;ukasaptati.

<p>Page 13. <hi>Add to footnote</hi> which begins on this page&mdash;See also Zimmer, <foreign lang=de>Alt-Indisches Leben</foreign>, pp. 329&ndash;331.

<p>Page 35, line 29, &ldquo;who knew when it behoved him to speak.&rdquo; I adopted this translation of <hi>de&sacute;ajna</hi>, in deference to the opinion of a good native scholar, but might not the word mean simply &ldquo;knowing countries?&rdquo; The crow then would be a kind of feathered Ulysses, cp. Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 255. The fable may remind some readers of the following lines in Spenser&apos;s Mother Hubberd&apos;s Tale.

<lg>
    <l>He shortly met the Tygre and the Bore
    <l>That with the simple Camell raged sore
    <l>In bitter words, seeking to take occasion
    <l>Upon his fleshly corpse to make invasion.
</lg>

<p>Page 37. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;In Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 15, the heron, which is carrying the fox, persuades it to let go, in order that she may spit on her hand. (A similar incident on page <ref target=pb112 type=pageref>112</ref> of this volume.) Gosson in his School of Abuse, Arber&apos;s Reprints, p. 43, observes, &ldquo;Geese are foolish birds, yet, when they fly over mount Taurus, they shew great wisdom in their own defence for they stop their pipes full of gravel to avoid gagling, and so by silence escape the eagles.&rdquo;

<p>Page 40. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;This story has been found in Tibet by the Head Master of the Bhútia School, Darjiling, Babu &Sacute;arat Chandra Dás.

<p>Page 41. <hi>Add to note &Dagger;</hi> which begins on this page.

<p>This is the 218th Játaka. A <hi lang=sa-Latn>gámavásí</hi> deposits ploughshares with a <hi lang=sa-Latn>nagaravásí</hi> who sells them and buys <hi lang=sa-Latn>músikavaccam</hi>. &ldquo;<hi lang=sa-Latn>Phálá te músike hi kháditá ti músikavaccam dassesi.</hi><corr>&rdquo;</corr> The rest much as in our tale. A <hi lang=sa-Latn>kulalo</hi> is said to have carried off the son. (Fausböll, Vol. II, p 181.) If Plutarch is to be believed, the improbability of the merchant&apos;s son&apos;s story is not so very striking, for he tells us, in his life of Marcellus, that rats and mice gnawed the gold in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.

<p>Page 44. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;This story is found in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 112. So Ino persuaded the women of the country to roast the wheat before it was sown, Preller <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol. II, p. 312. To this Ovid refers, Fasti, II, 628, and III, 853&ndash;54.

<p>Page 45, line 6. &ldquo;That his spiritual instructor was high-nosed.&rdquo; Cp. The Two Noble Kinsmen, Act IV, Scene 2, 1. 110,

<lg>
    <l>His nose stands high, a character of honour.
</lg>

<pb id=pb636 n=636><p>Page 52. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;The Kurunga Miga Játaka, No. 206 in Fausböll Vol. II, p. 152<corr sic=")"></corr> is a still better parallel. In this the tortoise gnaws through the bonds, the crane (<hi>satapatto</hi>) smites the hunter on the mouth as he is leaving his house; he twice returns to it on account of the evil omen; and when the tortoise is put in a bag, the deer leads the hunter far into the forest, returns with the speed of the wind, upsets the bag, and tears it open.

<p>Page 53. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;The woman behaves like Erippe in a story related by Parthenius (VIII). In the heading of the tale we are told that Aristodemus of Nysa tells the same tale with different names.

<p>Page 57. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;See also Herrtage&apos;s English Gesta, p. 127, Tale 33.

<p>Page 60. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;This story is found in Prym und Socin&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 292, where a man undertakes to teach a camel to read.

<p>Page 64, line 16. For Pra&ddotb;ívin the Petersburg lexicographers would read Prajívin, as in the Panchatantra.

<p>Page 65. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;See also Brand&apos;s Popular Antiquities, Vol. III, pp. 196, 197. The story of the crow dissuading the birds from making the owl king is Játaka, No. 270. In the Kosiya Játaka, No. 226, an army of crows attacks an owl.

<p>Page 67. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;There is a very hypocritical cat in Prym und Socin, <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. lx. See especially p. 242, and cp. p. 319.

<p>Page 68. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;In the XXth tale of the English Gesta Romanorum (Ed. Herrtage) three &ldquo;lechis&rdquo; persuade Averoys that he is a &ldquo;lepre;&rdquo; and he becomes one from &ldquo;drede,&rdquo; but is cured by a bath of goat&apos;s blood. The 69th tale in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Populares, Os Dois Mentíroses</foreign>, bears a strong resemblance to this. One brother confirms the other&apos;s lies.

<p>Page 72. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;This bears a strong resemblance to <foreign lang=pt>A Formiga e a Neve</foreign>, No. II, in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>.

<p>Page 75<corr sic=",">.</corr> <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;Cp. Grohmann, <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 35.

<p>Page 77. <hi>In note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;for Giusa read Giufá.

<p>Page 84. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;The wife of the <hi>kumbhíla</hi> in the Varanindajátaka (57 in Fausböll&apos;s edition) has a longing for a monkey&apos;s heart. The original is, no doubt, the Su&mbarb;sumára Játaka in Fausböll, Vol. II, p. 158. See also Mélusine, p. 179, where the story is quoted from Thorburn&apos;s Bannu or our Afghan Frontier.

<p>Page 85. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi> which begins on this page. An ass is deceived in the same way in Prym und Socin, <foreign lang=de>Syrische Märchen</foreign>, p. 279. In Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 92, one of the boys proposes to say that the <foreign lang=de>Glücksvogel</foreign> had no heart. Rutherford in the Introduction to his edition of Babrius, p. xxvii, considers that the <corr sic=able>fable</corr> is alluded to by Solon in the following words:

<!-- http://www.aoidoi.org/poets/solon/solon-9-and-11.pdf Solon 11:5 -->
<lg>
    <l><GR><um'ewc d&apos; e<=ic m`en <'ekastoc >al'wpekoc >'iqnesi ba'inei</GR>
    <l><GR>s'umpasin d&apos; <um=in qo=uroc >'enesti n'ooc&middot;</GR>
    <l><GR>>ec g`ar gl=wssan <or=ate ka`i e>ic >'epoc a>i'olon >andr'oc,</GR>
    <l><GR>e>ic >'ergon d&apos; o>ud`en gign'omenon bl'epete.</GR>
</lg>


<p>But all turns upon the interpretation of the first line, which Schneidewin renders &ldquo;<hi lang=la>Singuli sapitis, cuncti desipitis</hi>.&rdquo;

<p>Page 87. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;See also Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, p. 370 (note). Gosson in his School of Abuse, Arber&apos;s Reprint, pp. 68&ndash;69, tells the story of Dionysius.

<p>Page 89. <hi>Add to note &Dagger;</hi>&mdash;Professor Aufrecht in his <foreign lang=de>Beiträge zur Kenntniss Indischer Dichter</foreign> quotes a Strophe of Amarasinha in which the following line occurs,

<p><hi lang=sa-Latn>Dugdhá seyam achetanena jaratí dugdhá&sacute;ayát súkarí<corr>.</corr></hi> Professor Aufrecht proposes to read <hi lang=sa-Latn>gardabhí</hi> for <hi lang=sa-Latn>súkarí</hi>.

<pb id=pb637 n=637><p>Page 90, line 16 <hi>of footnote</hi>&mdash;After the words &ldquo;Bohn&apos;s Gesta Romanorum, Introduction, page xliii,&rdquo; add &ldquo;It is No. XXVI, in Herrtage&apos;s Edition.&rdquo;

<p>Page 100. <hi>Add to note</hi> on the story of Gha&tdotb;a and Karpara. The story appears in Melusine, 1878 p. 17 under the title of &ldquo;<foreign lang=fr>Le Voleur Avisé, Conte Breton</foreign>.&rdquo; See also Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales, Introduction, pp. xlvii and ff.

<p>Page 101. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;This story is simply the Cullapadumajátaka, No. 193 in Fausböll&apos;s edition. See also Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales, Introduction, pp. lxi&ndash;lxiii.

<p>Page 103. <hi>Add to footnote</hi> which begins on this page.

<p>See <foreign lang=de>Die dankbaren Thiere</foreign> in Gaal&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 175, and Der Rothe Hund, p. 339. In the Saccamkirajatátaka No. 73, Fausböll, Vol. I, 323, a hermit saves a prince, a rat, a parrot and a snake. The rat and snake are willing to give treasures, the parrot rice, but the prince orders his benefactor&apos;s execution, and is then killed by his own subjects. See Bernhard Schmidt&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Griechische Märchen</foreign>, p. 3, note. See also Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales, Introduction, pp. lxiii&ndash;lxv.

<p>Page 107, line 9&mdash;&ldquo;The bird went and brought a casket full of jewels.&rdquo; Cp. Gijjhajátaka, Fausböll, Vol. II, p. 51.

<p>Page 108. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;See also Benfey&apos;s Panchatantra, Vol. I, p. 523.

<p>Page 118, 1. 28&mdash;&ldquo;What is the meaning of this statement, &lsquo;A man with a discus &amp;c.<corr>&rsquo;</corr>?&rdquo; This part of the story may be compared with the story of <foreign lang=pt>As tres Lebres</foreign> in Coelho&apos;s <foreign lang=pt>Contos Portuguezes</foreign>, p. 90, or that of the Blind Man and the Cripple in Ralston&apos;s Russian Folk Tales.

<p>Page 119, line 3. &ldquo;Now hear this story of the woman who killed eleven.&rdquo;

<p>In the notice of the first ten fasciculi of this translation which appeared in the <hi>Saturday Review</hi> for May 1882, the following interesting remark is made on this story:

<p>&ldquo;And the story of the woman, who had eleven husbands, bears a curious but no doubt accidental likeness to an anecdote related by St. Jerome about a contest between a man and his wife as to which would outlive the other, she having previously conducted to the grave scores of husbands and he scores of wives.&rdquo;

<p>Page 142. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;See Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, p. 195, and Ralston&apos;s Tibetan Tales, Introduction, p. lii.

<p>Page 144, line 9. &ldquo;By means of this juice the female swan was restored to life.&rdquo;

<p>See the story of Polyidos, in Preller, <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol<corr>.</corr> II, p. 478. Preller refers to Nonnus, XXV, 451 and ff. The story terminates <GR>yuq`h d&apos; e>ic d'emac >=hlje t`o de'uteron</GR>. See also Baring Gould&apos;s Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, New Edition, 1869, pp. 399&ndash;402, and Rohde, <foreign lang=de>Der Griechische Roman</foreign>, pp. 112 and 126.

<p>Page 148. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;In the story called &ldquo;<foreign lang=de>Der rothe Hund</foreign>,&rdquo; Gaal, <foreign lang=de>Märchen der Magyaren</foreign>, p. 362, the queen becomes a dry mulberry tree. See also Grohmann, <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 116. In Ovid&apos;s Metamorphoses, XIV, 517 an abusive <hi>pastor</hi> is turned into an <hi>oleaster</hi>.

<p>Page 154. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;See also Grohmann&apos;s account of the &ldquo;Wassermann,&rdquo; <foreign lang=de>Sagen aus Böhmen</foreign>, p. 148.

<p>Page 162. <hi>Add to footnote</hi>&mdash;In Gonzenbach&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sicilianische Märchen</foreign>, Nos. 33 and 34, we have tales of &ldquo;A substituted Bride;&rdquo; see Dr. Köhler&apos;s notes.

<p>Page 234, line 2, for <hi>asoka</hi>-tree read &ldquo;<hi>&sacute;in&sacute;apá</hi>-tree,&rdquo; and see note on page <ref target=n293.1 type=pageref>293</ref>.

<p>Page 242, line 1 of text for &ldquo;Vikramasena&rdquo; read &ldquo;Trivikramasena.&rdquo;

<p>Page 252. <hi>In note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;for <hi>kálatamaei</hi> read <hi>kálatamasi</hi>.

<p>Page 260. <hi>Add to the note which begins on this page.</hi> The story which Oesterley quotes from the <corr sic="Tutínámah">Tútínámah</corr> is still found in Bannu, as appears from a review of Mr. Thorburn&apos;s book in Melusine (1878), p. 179. The reviewer, M. Loys Brueyre, tells us that it is found in the Bohemian tales of Erben under the title, Wisdom and Fortune.

<pb id=pb638 n=638><p>Page 264. <hi>Add to note *</hi>&mdash;A head is cut off and fastened on again in the Glücksvogel, Waldau&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 108. In Coelho&apos;s Portuguese Stories, No. XXVI, O Colhereiro, the 3rd daughter fastens on, in the Bluebeard chamber, with blood, found in a vase marked with their names, the heads of her decapitated sisters.

<p>Page 267. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> Cp. Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign><corr>,</corr> Vol. I, p. 53, where king Wilkinus marries a Meerweib, and the following extract from a letter of Mr. David Fitzgerald&apos;s in the Academy.

<p>&ldquo;The Siren&apos;s tale&mdash;like many other episodes of the Iliad and the Odyssey&mdash;reappears in various forms, one of the most curious of which is perhaps to be found in Ireland. I borrow it from O&apos;Curry; and I omit the depreciatory criticism with which it is now the fashion to season extracts from that scholar&apos;s useful works. Ruad, son of Rigdonn, a king&apos;s son, crossing over to North-land with three ships and thirty men in each found his vessel held fast in mid-sea. [Compare the tale of Vidúshaka in Vol. I.] At last he leaped over the side to see what was holding it, and sinking down through the waters, alighted in a meadow where were nine beautiful women. These gave him nine boatloads of gold as the price of his embraces, and by their power held the three vessels immoveable on the water above for nine days. Promising to visit them on his return, the young Irish prince got away from the Sirens and their beds of red bronze, and continued his course to Lochlann, where he stayed with his follow-pupil, son to the king of that country, for seven years. Coming back, the vessels put about to avoid the submerged isle, and had nearly gained the Irish shore, when they heard behind them the song of lamentation of the nine sea-women, who were in vain pursuit of them in a boat of bronze. One of these murdered before Ruad&apos;s eyes the child she had borne him, and flung it head foremost after him. O&apos;Curry left a version of this tale from the Book of Ballymote. I have borrowed a detail or two given in the <hi>Tochmarc Emere</hi> (fol. 21b)&mdash;<hi>e. g.</hi>, the important Homeric feature of the watery <hi>meadow</hi> (machaire). The story given by Gervase of Tilbury (ed. Liebrecht, pp. 30, 31), of the porpoise-men in the Mediterranean and the young sailor; the Shetland seal-legend in Grimm&apos;s edition of Croker&apos;s tales (<foreign lang=de>Irische Elfen-Märchen</foreign>, Leipzig, 1826, pp. xlvii <hi>et seqq.</hi>); and the story found in Vincentius Bellovacensis and elsewhere, of the mermaid giantess and her purple cloak, may be named as belonging or related to the same cycle. These legends are represented in living Irish traditions and the purple cloak just referred to appears, much disguised, in the story of Liban in the book of the Dun.&rdquo; Coraes in his notes on the <corr sic=Aethiopica>Æthiopica</corr> of Heliodorus, p. 225, has the following quotation from the life of Apollonius of Tyana written by Philostratus, IV, 25, referring to Menippus who married a female of the Rákshasí type and was saved from his fate by Apollonius.

<!-- http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A2008.01.0595%3Abook%3D4%3Achapter%3D25 -->

<p>&ldquo;<GR><H qrhst`h n'umfh m'ia t=wn >Empous=wn >estin <`ac Lami'ac te ka`i Mormoluk'iac o<i pollo`i <hgo=untai ......... sark=wn d`e, ka`i m'alista >anjrwpe'iwn, >er=wsi, ka`i palle'uousi (>'is. sfallousi) to=ic >afrodis'ioic, o<`uc >`an >ej'elwsi da'isasjai.</GR>&rdquo;

<p>P. 268. <hi>Add to footnote *</hi>&mdash;See Waldau, <foreign lang=de>Böhmische Märchen</foreign>, p. 410.

<p>Page 276. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;Cp. also Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. II, p. 24. We are told that Melampus buried the parents of a brood of snakes, and they rewarded him by licking his ears so that he understood the language of birds. (Preller, <foreign lang=de>Griechische Mythologie</foreign>, Vol<corr>.</corr> II, p. 474.)

<p>Page 299. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> So Brynhild burns herself with the body of Sigurd, (Hagen&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Helden-Sagen</foreign>, Vol. III, p. 166).

<p>Page 307. <hi>Add to footnote.</hi> Benfey gives a number of stories of this kind in the 1st Volume of his Panchatantra, pp. 41&ndash;52. He traces them all back to a tendency of the Indo-Germanic race to look upon their deities as belonging to both sexes at once.

<pb id=pb639 n=639><p>Page 315, line 22<corr>,</corr> for <hi>Vidykdhara</hi> read <hi>Vidyádhara</hi>.

<p>Page 317. <hi>Add to footnote *</hi>&mdash;See Bernhard Schmidt&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Griechische Märchen</foreign>, p. 106.

<p>Page 357. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;See also Grimm&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Irische Elfenmärchen</foreign> (which is based on Croker&apos;s Tales), p. 8.

<p>Page 361, line 18. &ldquo;I cut off my own flesh.&rdquo; So in Melusine, p. 447, the hero of the tale &ldquo;<foreign lang=fr>La Montagne Noire</foreign>&rdquo; rides on the back of a crow, to whom he has to give flesh, as often as he says &ldquo;<hi>couac</hi>&rdquo;. At last he has to give him flesh from his own thighs. The wounds are healed instantaneously by means of a &ldquo;<hi lang=fr>fiole de graisse</hi>&rdquo; which he carries with him. See No. 61 in Gonzenbach&apos;s <foreign lang=de>Sicilianische Märchen</foreign> with Dr. Köhler&apos;s notes.

<p>Page 388. <hi>Note *</hi>&mdash;Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;it Ráma Chandra of Alwar points out that the reference in <hi>patangav&rdotb;itti</hi> is to the &ldquo;rushing of a moth into a candle.&rdquo; In the text therefore &ldquo;would be a mere reckless rushing on destruction&rdquo; should be substituted for &ldquo;is a mere chimerical fancy.&rdquo;

<p>Page 391, line 24. &ldquo;Like the stream of the Narmadá, when let loose from the embrace of Arjuna.&rdquo; Pa&ndotb;&ddotb;it Ráma Chandra of Alwar points out that the reference is to one of the exploits of Arjuna Sahasrabáhu, often called Kártavíryya, which is related in the Uttara Ká&ndotb;&ddotb;a of the Rámáya&ndotb;a, Sarga 32.

<p>Page 493. <hi>Add to footnote &Dagger;</hi>&mdash;In the same way in Játaka No. 318, beginning on page 58 of Fausböll&apos;s third Volume, a lady falls in love with a criminal who is being led to execution.

<p>Page 498. <hi>Add to note &dagger;</hi>&mdash;This story is also found in the Chariyá Pi&tdotb;aka. See Oldenberg&apos;s Buddha, p. 302. For &ldquo;begin&rdquo; <hi>read</hi> &ldquo;begins.&rdquo;




<pb id=pb640 n=640>
<div1 id=errata>
<head>Errata.</head>


<div2 type=Section>
<head>Errata to Vol. I.</head>


<!-- These issues have been fixed in the main text -->

<p>Page 12, line 13, <hi>for</hi> Pá&tdotb;alá <hi>read</hi> Pá&tdotb;alí.

<p>Page 110, 3rd line from bottom, <hi>for</hi> Kuntibhoga <hi>read</hi> Kuntibhoja.

<p>Page 205, line 1, <hi>for</hi> &Sacute;aktivega <hi>read</hi> &Sacute;aktideva.

<p>Page 208, line 16, <hi>for</hi> Satyavrata <hi>read</hi> &Sacute;aktideva.

<p>Page 289, line 2, <hi>for</hi> Hola! <hi>read</hi> Holla!

<p>Page 319, 4th line from bottom, <hi>for</hi> Naraváhana <hi>read</hi> Naraváhanadatta.

<p>Page 356, 3rd line from bottom, <hi>for</hi> Vijayakhetra <hi>read</hi> Vijayakshetra.

<p>Page 441, 11th line from bottom, <hi>for</hi> Durandhara <hi>read</hi> Dhurandhara.

<p>Page 490, line 6, <hi>for</hi> P&rdotb;ithvídhara <hi>read</hi> P&rdotb;ithvírúpa.


<div2>
<head>Errata to Vol. II.</head>


<p>Page 96, margin, <hi>for</hi> Devadatta&apos;s <hi>read</hi> Dhanadeva&apos;s.

<p>Page 97, line 16, <hi>for</hi> Devadatta <hi>read</hi> Dhanadeva.

<p>Page 198, line 7, <hi>for</hi> Gangá <hi>read</hi> Ganges.

<p>Page 228, line 2, <hi>for</hi> Chandradatta <hi>read</hi> &Sacute;ankhadatta.

<p>Page 242, Chapter LXXVI, line 1, <hi>for</hi> Vikramasena <hi>read</hi> Trivikramasena.

<p>Page 266, line 10, from bottom, <hi>for</hi> Cha&ndotb;&ddotb;asena <hi>read</hi> Cha&ndotb;&ddotb;asinha.

<p>Page 277, line 3, <hi>for</hi> Víravara <hi>read</hi> Víradeva.

<p>Page 306, line 23, <hi>for</hi> &Sacute;a&sacute;i <hi>read</hi> &Sacute;a&sacute;in.

<p>Page 434, line 20, <hi>for</hi> Puskharávatí <hi>read</hi> Pushkarávatí.

<p>Page 469, line 4, <hi>for</hi> Naraváhana&apos;s <hi>read</hi> Naraváhanadatta&apos;s.

<p>Page 529, line 8, <hi>for</hi> Kuvalayávatí <hi>read</hi> Kuvalayávali.


